[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The story of psilocybin,
or commonly known as magic
mushrooms, is a long
and controversial one.
Because of Hollywood, Disney
films, and word of mouth,
psychedelic mushrooms have been
given a serious reputation.
Are they drugs?
Are they medicine?
Are they safe?
Are they keys to heaven or hell?
Let's put the rumors
aside and investigate
what we know to date.
It has been suggested that
because psilocybin mushrooms
most commonly grew in
droppings of cattle
and these animals have
been revered and followed
by many humans and religions
for thousands of years,
it is unlikely that our
ancestors disregarded
these mushrooms and
ignored experiencing
their mind-bending effects.
What exactly is the mysterious
world of the magic mushroom
experience?
What is the latest scientific
research showing us?
What are the most cutting edge
and cultural uses of them?
And what might they
be trying to teach us?
These strange beings
have been speculated
to predate the human race.
They may be able to
survive intergalactic space
travel and even volatile
entry into Earth's atmosphere,
floating from unknown distances
to our planet, our species,
and into our minds.
Mushroom species outnumber
plant species 10 to 1,
and their mycelia
spreads far and wide
under the Earth to connect with,
communicate to, and integrate
a fractal web across
many life forms.
Terence McKenna wrote
from the perspective
of the mushroom in the book
"Psilocybin: Magic Mushroom
Growers Guide," "I am
old, older than thought
in your species, which
is itself 50 times older
than your history.
Though I have been on Earth
for ages, I am from the stars.
My home is no one planet.
From many worlds scattered
through the shining
disk of the galaxy
have conditions
which allow my spores an
opportunity for life."
His brother, ethnobotanist
Dennis McKenna,
traces this mysterious
spore's historical use.
>> The mushrooms
were used in Mexico,
the psilocybin mushrooms
by the Aztecs, the Mayans,
and probably the Mazatecs,
and even older cultures.
So that's the
epicenter of the use
of these Psilocybe cubensis,
which grows on cow dung
and is a globally
distributed mushroom.
They'll show up pretty much
in any pasture in the tropics
where you have cattle.
So they had to be around
for millions of years,
you know, or many hundreds
of thousands of years,
probably in proximity
to human civilizations
or nomadic tribes,
if they had cattle.
But then we also
know there's evidence
they were used in Europe and
probably in South America,
maybe in Africa, maybe in Asia.
So how long have they been used?
There's no way to know.
But I would like to think they'd
been used a very long time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Because most of the classical
psychedelics require human
intervention, psilocybin
mushrooms were probably
the first psychedelic
to be discovered,
as they grew anywhere in the
tropics or subtropical climates
and would appear sprouting from
the droppings of large animals
like cows.
They could stand as much
as a foot tall with a cap
the size of a dinner plate.
It's likely that the
first wave of experiences
with eating these
mushrooms would
have made the individual think
that they had been poisoned.
But after a while, the
phenomena would likely
have been seen as divine,
otherworldly, and, quite
possibly, an experience
with death and rebirth,
a resurrection of the psyche.
When the Spanish
conquistadors spread
through present-day Mexico
exploring new lands,
they encountered many
indigenous groups
practicing peculiar rituals.
The 16th century Aztec
statue of Xochipilli
was found in Southern
Mexico with engravings
of sacred psychoactive plants
like tobacco, Morning Glory,
along with several
other flowers,
and the Psilocybe
aztecorum mushrooms.
Maya archaeologist
Stephen De Borhegyi
believed that hallucinogenic
mushroom rituals
were central to Maya religions.
The mushroom stones
of the Guatemalan
highlands date to
at least 1,000 BC
and are believed to have
been used to honor and grind
the dried mushrooms before use.
There are some that believe
that these mushrooms,
or the ergot fungus
that grew on barley,
were used in the Eleusinian
Mystery's fabled Kykeon brew.
>> The question is, what were
they offering to these people
that they kept the attention
of the antique world for 2000
years?
It's a long time.
I mean, fads come and go.
But what they were
doing was quite--
not quite clear until Albert
Hoffman discovered LSD.
Steve Gordon Wasson, who brought
the Mexican magic mushrooms
from the Mazatec culture and
Carl Ruck, a Greek scholar.
They spent several years,
very, very meticulous research,
and they came to the conclusion
that the key was a beverage,
sacred beverage, which
was called Kykeon,
K-Y-K-E-O-N that was
administered in a very critical
part of the ceremony.
>> These mysterious events
spanned from 1,600 BC to 392 AD
until Theodosius I
closed the sanctuaries.
The exact recipe has
never been found,
and the last remaining
hints of the mystery school
was demolished by King
Alaric of the Goths,
who brought a Christian invasion
to destroy the old sites.
This invasion was the
beginning of a long reign
of the new religion
in town, forbidding
the use of plant sacraments.
Now, fast forward to 1955.
R. Gordon Wasson, who is an
amateur mycologist and banker
to JP Morgan, made his
way to Sierra Mazateca
in Southern Mexico to visit a
curandera named Maria Sabina.
In this shamanic
village, Sabina was
known for healing her community
with powerful mushroom rituals.
She agreed to welcome
Wasson into one
of the rituals in good faith
that he could take pictures,
but none were allowed
to be published.
This was to maintain the sacred
space of those being healed
and to protect the village
from outsiders knowing
too much of their rituals.
So Wasson agreed and
proceeded to take
private pictures of Maria
Sabina calling in the mushroom
spirits for healing.
>> She said the spirits in
the mushrooms, the ninos,
little children, were the ones
that she worked with in concert
with the mushroom entities
for healing for her patients.
So, Gordon Wasson went down,
and had a photographer,
and had a team of people,
and published this in 1957,
a hit in "Life Magazine"
in 1957 and then
got into every home
in middle America
and basically initiated
the psychedelic '60s in '57
by telling people that
this mushroom existed
in New Mexico, which altered
consciousness and had
this shamanic lineage.
>> On May 13, 1957,
"Life Magazine"
published Wasson's photographs,
and the story of the mushroom
rituals swept through
the Western world.
Flocks of Americans began
to flood this small town
in search of the most
mind-expanding experience they
could find.
Sabina was reported as saying,
it doesn't work in this way.
The spirits of the
mushrooms helped
to heal humanity from illness
instead of introducing them
to God.
But by this point,
the Western world
was hypnotized by
the claims being
made about these mushrooms,
and shortly thereafter,
the university studies began,
but not without pushback.
>> There is nothing smart.
There's nothing grown up or
sophisticated in taking an LSD
trip at all.
They're just being
complete fools.
>> Don't you feel that it's
wrong to encourage the use
of these illegal drugs
by college students.
This is, in effect,
admitting encouraging
the breaking of the law?
>> Well, I never tell anyone
what to do with their body
because what we're talking
about here is the first and last
frontier of freedom, my body.
>> Timothy Leary was a part of
the original psilocybin studies
at Harvard University.
40 years after these studies
and after the prohibition
of psychedelics
finally loosened,
professor of psychiatry
and behavioral sciences
at Johns Hopkins University,
Dr. Roland Griffiths,
took up psilocybin
research once more.
>> We began our studies in 2000,
and I initiated my interest
in this because I had taken
a meditation practice up,
and I was interested in shifts
in states of consciousness.
I was actually
skeptical about the idea
that psilocybin
could produce deeply
spiritually-significant,
mystical-type experiences.
But indeed, the data spoke very
clearly to us that it could.
So we did choose psilocybin,
I think thoughtfully.
One is that most people
at the time we initiated
this work couldn't
spell psilocybin,
didn't quite know what
it was, and it certainly
didn't have the cultural
baggage that LSD did.
So LSD and mescaline have
very long duration of action,
more on the order of
12 hours as opposed
to psilocybin, which
is four to six hours.
So that makes it a much
more tractable compound
to work with in a
clinical setting.
DMT, on the other hand, is
very short acting and can also
be given with an MAO inhibitor.
>> An MAO inhibitor makes
DMT last four to six hours.
But the pharmacology is
more complex and difficult
to receive approval
from the FDA.
However, psilocybin
produces similar results
with far less complexity.
>> The psilocybin molecule
and the DMT molecule are very
closely related to one another.
In a sense, psilocybin
can be rightly described
as orally-active DMT because DMT
is not normally orally active.
>> Even though the
molecules are very similar,
the mind-expanding experiences
aren't as similar as it would
seem.
Each psychedelic molecule,
called a tryptamine,
is structured in a
very specific way
to trigger specific
neurotransmitters in the brain,
causing every psychedelic plant
to elicit different effects.
And it all depends upon
the neurotransmitters
that the substances play on.
Serotonin mimicking is the
hallmark of psychedelica.
Serotonin allows
human consciousness
to assemble the consensus
reality that we typically
inhabit, and it even forges
our sense of self and identity,
and psilocybin mushrooms break
down the rigid perceptions
of normal waking consciousness.
>> Psilocybin appears acutely
to decrease activity within
a certain network of brain
hubs called the default mode
network.
And that network is very active
under conditions of vigilance
and depression, and
it's deactivated
when people are, for instance,
long-term meditators.
And it's thought that
that area is somehow
tied up in with respect to
self-referential processing,
a sense of self.
It turns out that
psilocybin decreases
default mode networking
or functioning much
as the same way that
meditation decreases
activity in that brain center.
And that brain center happens
to be activated in depression.
So that might account for
anti-depressant effects
of psilocybin.
>> The fact that brain imaging
is now showing similar results
between the benefits of
psilocybin and meditation has
not only confirmed what
Tim Leary, Richard Alpert,
and Ralph Metzner were looking
for in the original Harvard
studies, it seems to lend to the
healing properties of ancient
shamanic tribes as well.
For the experiences met
within the psilocybin trip
are seen by spiritual
adepts to be mere glimpses
into the higher domains.
They are not necessary
to get us there.
And if done
irresponsibly, they will
atrophy our inner
faculties that allow
us to achieve these states
without these substances.
So the judicious
use of psychedelics
are seen by many to be merely
the reminder that these states
exist, that inner
healing is possible,
that human consciousness
is not static,
but an ever-evolving phenomena.
Therefore, long-term meditators
and psilocybin volunteers
at Johns Hopkins are tapping
into their own neurology
and disrupting the inner
identity that is unwell.
What does it mean that
de-stabilizing people's sense
of self can be
useful in healing?
Is it because human illness lies
in our beliefs about ourselves
and how we fit into
the world around us?
Why are the same effects
seen in long-term meditators?
>> They are fundamentally
re-organizational experiences
that people describe as having
a sense of interconnectedness
of all people and things,
a sense of sacredness,
a truth value and authenticity
to the experience that they
find uniquely compelling and
authoritative, positive mood,
a sense of love or
open heartedness,
transcendence of time and
space, and then another feature
described is ineffability.
They find it difficult to put
these experiences in words.
>> Whether it's caused by
a psychedelic substance,
the act of meditation,
or caused spontaneously,
recalling mystical-type
experiences in words seems
to pale in comparison to
the underlying meaning.
However, whether the
experience itself
can be spoken about or
not, psilocybin mushrooms
are being found to help with a
number of epidemic-level health
issues in the modern world.
>> The spectrum of therapeutic
effects are great, you know,
anxiety in terminal
patients, anxiety about--
existential anxiety for
people who are dying.
That's one.
PTSD, it's promising for that.
It looks promising
for addictions.
There's been spectacular work
on psilocybin and smoking
cessation, which is
kind of unexpected,
but it's very effective
for smoking cessation.
Depression is another one.
Depression is being identified
as these FDA protocols are
advanced, and
psilocybin can have
a therapeutic effect on it.
>> While so many mental and
physical health issues are
given hope in the face of
new psilocybin research,
the fact that
federally-controlled research
is being overseen by someone who
is open to studying and mapping
even the abstract phenomena
that fill people with purpose
and meaning is hopeful to those
who believe that there is more
than meets the eye behind
these psychedelic journeys that
people are explaining.
>> I think that the most
compelling and remarkable
finding across all of our
populations is that psilocybin,
when administered under these
conditions to people who have
been carefully screened and
prepared and then received
psilocybin in a setting such
as this when they are laying
on a couch, and have eye
shades on, and headphones,
and they're in the presence
of people who have developed
rapport and trust with them,
that the great majority
of these people have these
remarkable experiences that,
in fact, map on to
naturally-occurring,
mystical-type experiences.
>> When the mindset and physical
setting has been carefully
constructed for a
healing experience,
there is an abundance
of accounts of not only
the occurrence of healing, but a
congruent sense of a deep inner
knowing that the healing is
beyond physical mechanisms
alone, that an underlying
universal shift is taking
place, and the whole
being, not just the body,
is receiving healing, that we
are more than what we could
ever conceive of and, in
fact, we are all different
expressions of the
same underlying fabric.
And because these
mushrooms reliably
bring about these
experiences, the neurology
can finally be analyzed
in a scientific setting.
>> We know that people have
such experiences in absence
of psychedelics, but under
these special set and setting
conditions, we can occasion
these experiences at very high
probability.
And that opens this up
to the interrogation
by scientific method so
we can now ask questions
about the nature of
these experiences
and the transformative changes
that heretofore couldn't
be asked because we didn't
understand what processes
or what conditions
optimize the probability
of these experiences.
>> Because scientific technology
has advanced considerably since
the 1960 Harvard studies,
psilocybin effects on the brain
are far more understood today.
With the destabilization
of the default mode network
in the brain, causing for
internal neural communication
to change dramatically,
we have a glimpse
at what functions of the
brain hold trauma in the body.
Most physiological illness that
has been conditioned into us
is seen as unhealthy
communication
between brain regions.
When someone has the
opportunity to view
their life, their beliefs, their
world, and the interactions
between them all in a new
and unbiased perspective,
as psychedelics
often do, it seems
that the innate intelligence
of the human being
can identify the
communication error
and bring neurochemical
processes back into balance.
Whereas most pharmaceutical
meds address symptoms only,
and most of the time
merely mask them,
psilocybin is being
seen to address
the source of these
symptoms, causing
a lasting rippling effect
into all areas of life.
>> I think that the most
interesting feature is not that
these drugs produce these
acute salient effects,
but that these effects are
remembered, and there--
and there become attribution
points for which people say,
you know, I remember that
experience every day.
My life has changed
because of it.
My attitudes have
changed because of it.
We really only, at this
point, have the faintest hint
of what kind of network
processes, what kind of brain
processes, are altered.
Exactly which networks are
involved and how they interact
is still largely
a mystery to us.
>> Perhaps science is still
unable to definitively map
the neurological
basis of psilocybin.
But new advancements are
seeing in our understanding
of these mushrooms'
effects on the brain.
Meanwhile, to arrive at the
mind bending and life changing
experiences that
they afford, people
have been left to
secretive methods
to get their hands on them,
keeping this age-old sacrament
and it's shamanic use
alive in the underground.
>> Mushrooms are recolonizing
the world right now one
basement at a time.
A lot of people are
growing this medicine
and are using it
with sacred intention
and not speaking
about it very much.
It's a very personal
experience for them.
And people are cultivating
mushrooms both for large
experiences, being spiritual,
trans-personal experiences,
but people are also primarily
cultivating this medicine
for micro dosing and using low--
incredibly low doses
of psilocybin mushrooms
pretty regularly for the
treatment of depression,
anxiety, or to provide a
little more energy than they
would normally have.
>> Micro-dosing psychedelic
plants has been popularized
mostly by Dr. James Fadiman,
who after 40 years of experience
has called this sub-perceptible
dose a problem-solving amount.
Whereas moderate doses
are effective for therapy,
and high doses for spirituality.
And because of
this, the phenomena
has recently found itself
in unsuspecting places
like the workplace
in Silicon Valley
and other analytical
occupations.
>> A lot of software
engineers, myself included,
tend to be victims of
constrained thinking,
or we think very logically
and analytically like this is
the way.
Like you know, you start seeing
code everywhere in everything
you look at.
But the psychedelics
just take all of that,
and rip it up, and
tear it into pieces,
and you're like, oh,
my god, I don't really
know what I know anymore.
And that can be really difficult
and really, really amazing.
And so like, with engineering,
what it tends to do
is I'll like get stuck
on a problem, you know,
like maybe it's some
engineering solution.
I just can't think of
anything, and I sit with it,
and then I just
like suddenly, like,
I can almost see the
problem I'm working on,
like in three dimensions,
you know what I mean?
Like my eyes closed or
whatever and to just see it
in a new way.
>> Dosage is the most surefire
way to dramatically change
the effects gained from
psychedelic mushrooms.
Terence McKenna is
known for categorizing
what he called the
heroic dose at 5
or sometimes 5 and 1/2 grams.
To most, this would be
considered an amount enough
to elicit a
spiritual experience.
Psychologist and
author Rick Strassmann,
aside from his
famed DMT research,
also administered
psilocybin to volunteers
in a lesser-known study.
>> The kinds of
psilocybin doses,
which are now being called
high, were just, you know,
barely threshold psychedelic
in our volunteers.
And, yeah, our final
large dose of psilocybin,
if we had continued
with the studies,
would have been twice what is
considered a high dose now.
So that's what was
the main finding.
You know, we just
pushed the dose more
than anybody had ever pushed it.
>> The doses in Dr. Strassmann's
studies were over 8 grams.
This is almost twice as much as
Terence McKenna's heroic dose.
>> Now, we know that the
probability of having salient
experiences increases
as a function of dose.
But the probability of
having difficult experiences
also increases as
a function of dose.
But I should say
that very often, it's
those deeply uncomfortable
experiences that
provide a window of opportunity
through which, if people can
investigate and go
through, they'll
open into larger experiences.
So, very often experiences
that people will subsequently
describe as having
been difficult
are among the most interesting
and meaningful to them.
>> Trauma is typically deeply
uncomfortable at the moment
of its adoption, as it's an
experience that is too intense
or complex to
process all at once.
So the memory is stored in
the neurology and the tissues
of the body, awaiting a moment
to resurface and continue
being processed so it can
finally be surrendered and let
go of.
Perhaps that is why these
larger doses are useful.
They de-stabilize the
habitual processes
of the brain, which likely
serve as a distraction
and suppressant of trauma and
unwanted aspects of the psyche.
But once this neural
habituation has destabilized,
the natural healing
intelligence of the human being
goes into housecleaning mode,
and old wounds are addressed.
But what happens
beyond these doses?
There are accounts from Kilindi
Iyi, a martial arts instructor
and mycologist, who
regularly takes 30-plus grams
in one setting, six
times the heroic dose.
The experience, as
he publicly noted,
is beyond language,
beyond the five senses,
and deeply embedded in
a world of symbolism
and primal forces
that obliterate
the concepts of space time.
At these astronomical
doses, he mentions
that the set and
setting has less
of an impact on the
journey to come.
Higher doses become less
therapeutic and far more
mystical.
The mystical experience may
be deeply transformative.
However, it can
also be traumatizing
to experience such intensity to
the untrained or uninitiated,
which is counter-intuitive
to the purpose
of the therapeutic doses.
In Maslow's hierarchy of
needs, the feeling of safety
is second only to food, water,
warmth, and rest, and you
can rest assured that
most of those needs
may not be met with higher
doses of psilocybin either.
A child entering
this world instantly
latches on to
predictability and sources
of safety and sustenance
from parents, environment,
and culture.
Anything less causes anxiety,
fear, and eventually trauma.
Psilocybin mushrooms, even in
moderate doses of 3 to 4 grams,
tends to dissolve our
grip on these needs.
5 to 8 grams pushes
this boundary
to the limit of
consensus sanity.
Some believe that
nothing valuable
lies beyond that limit.
Nothing out there can be brought
back here and made sense of.
But as we see with
psychonauts of DMT
or initiates of
the mystery schools
like Eleusis,
pushing the envelope
is the name of the game.
Venturing where no
one has gone before
is born into some
seekers' very nature.
Many believe that psilocybin
affords the initiate
or volunteer an
opportunity to experience
death and return from it.
>> So this work with psilocybin
and these reorganizational
kinds of emergent experiences
that come out of that speaks
very deeply to my own interest
and longing in understanding
the nature of consciousness.
It seems to me that the
fundamental question
that we as humans
are faced with is,
what are we really doing here?
How is it that we've come to
be in this sea of consciousness
and awareness?
You know, what's
really going on here?
What happens when we die?
How did this whole
phenomenon come about?
These are the existential
questions of life,
and personally, I
can't think of anything
more interesting and
intriguing, and I
think that psilocybin and
work with these compounds
provides a unique
doorway into exploration
of these sorts of experiences.
>> As science barrels into the
future with new technologies
to study ancient methodologies
for healing and spiritual
transformation, are we finally
on the verge of understanding
these psychedelic substances and
their unique effects on human
consciousness and
neurochemistry?
If psilocybin is the oldest
classical psychedelic
with widespread
shamanic use, perhaps we
are in the midst of a revival
of the old Eleusinian-style
mysteries, and perhaps
these mysteries are finally
being decoded and widespread,
a large-medicine heavily
suppressed, demonized,
and misunderstood finally
back into the hands of those who
intend to heal the world's ills
and voyage into the unknown.
Another highly-suppressed
and controversial
mind-expanding
plant species that
has been with humanity for ages
is the North American peyote
cactus and its sister
in South America known
as huachuma or San Pedro.
Up next, join us
as we investigate
the history of psychedelic
cacti use among indigenous
across the New World
and how they mirrored
ancient Greek initiations
as well as prophecies
surrounding the unification
of shamanic tribes everywhere.
[MUSIC PLAYING]